1. IEEE Trans Med Imaging. 2025 Nov 3;PP. doi: 10.1109/TMI.2025.3628159. Online 
ahead of print.

Feature Decomposition via Shared Low-rank Matrix Recovery for CT Report 
Generation.

Tian Y, Song Y.

Generating reports for medical images is an important task in medical automation 
that not only provides valuable objective diagnostic evidence but also 
alleviates the workload of radiologists. Many existing studies focus on chest 
X-rays that typically consist of one or a few images, where less attention is 
paid to other medical image types, such as computed tomography (CT) that contain 
a large number of continuous images. Many studies on CT report generation (CTRG) 
rely on convolutional networks or standard Transformers to model CT slice 
representation and combine them to obtain CT features, yet relatively little 
research has focused on subtle lesion features and volumetric continuity. In 
this paper, we propose shared low-rank matrix recovery (S-LMR) to decompose CT 
slices into shared anatomical patterns and lesion-focused features, together 
with continuous slice encoding (CSE) to explicitly model inter-slice continuity 
and capture progressive changes across adjacent slices, which are subsequently 
integrated with a large language model (LLM) for report generation. 
Specifically, the S-LMR separates the common patterns from the sparse 
lesion-focused features to highlight clinically significant information. Based 
on the outputs of S-LMR, CSE captures inter-slice relationships within a 
dedicated Transformer encoder and aligns the resulting visual features with 
textual information, thereby instructing the LLM to produce a CT report. 
Experiment results on benchmark datasets for CTRG show that our approach 
outperforms strong baselines and existing models, demonstrating state-of-the-art 
performance. Analyses further confirm that S-LMR and CSE effectively capture key 
evidence, leading to more accurate CTRG.

DOI: 10.1109/TMI.2025.3628159
PMID: 41182918