1. J Opt Soc Am A Opt Image Sci Vis. 2025 Jul 1;42(7):989-995. doi: 
10.1364/JOSAA.552041.

High-contrast dual-modal imaging of absorption and scattering using low-rank and 
sparse matrix decomposition of light fields.

Liu K, Wu J, Cao J, Zhuo R, Chen X, Zhou Q, Wang P, Shi G.

Optical absorption and scattering are critical properties of biological tissues, 
but strong background light often obscures this information, limiting imaging 
contrast and the visualization of tissue microstructures. Current methods for 
enhancing imaging contrast rely on image processing and noise suppression, but 
often lose critical details under strong background light. To address this 
issue, we propose a dual-modal imaging technique based on a low-rank and sparse 
matrix decomposition (LRSD) of light fields, enabling simultaneous high-contrast 
imaging of absorption and scattering and significantly improving imaging 
performance. Monte Carlo simulation results demonstrate that the low-rank 
component of the light field effectively separates background light, while the 
sparse component accurately captures the absorption and scattering properties of 
the target. In imaging experiments on skin follicle tissues, this method 
successfully extracted absorption and scattering information, achieving a 
twofold improvement in imaging contrast, with the SNR improving by 2.97 dB and 
significantly enhancing the visualization of tissue microstructures. Compared to 
traditional image filtering methods, the LRSD technique showed superior 
performance under strong background light conditions. Furthermore, imaging 
experiments on different regions of rabbit taste bud slices further validated 
the broad applicability and potential of this method in biological imaging. The 
high-contrast dual-modal imaging method proposed in this study demonstrates 
exceptional capabilities in visualizing the tissue structure, offering an 
innovative solution for the clinical evaluation of pathological sections.

DOI: 10.1364/JOSAA.552041
PMID: 40792953